= Introduction =

What is a compiler?

* A program that accepts as input a program text in a certain language and produces as output a program text in another language, while preserving the meaning of that text

Examples:
* C
* Lisp
* Java to bytecodes, which are then interpreted

Also:
* C++ to C or Intel Core 2
* High Performance Fortran to Fortran
* C to C

In the general sense:
* What is LaTeX?
* What is ghostview?

Compilers dont always produce executables

== Qualities of a Good Compiler ==

What qualities would you want in a compiler?

* generates correct code
* generates fast code
* conforms to the specifications of the input language
* copes with essentially arbitrary input size, variables
* compiltion time proprtional to size of source
* good diagnostics
* consistent optimisations 
* works well with debugger

=== Principles of Compilation ===
The compiler must:
* preserve the meaning of the program being compiled.
* "imprve" the source code in some way e.g. readability, optimization.

Other issues:
* Speed (of compield code)
* Space (size of compiled code)
* Feedback (infrmation provided to the user)
* Debugging 
* Compilation time efficiency


== Why study Compilatino Technology? ==

* Success stories
	- Applying theory to practice
	- Many practical applications have embedded languages
* Practical algorthmic & engineering issues:
	- Approximating really hard problems
	- Emphasis on efficiency and scalability
	- Small issues can be important!
* Ideas from different parts of computer science are involved:
	- AI: Heuristic search techniques; greedy algorithms - Algorithms; graph algorithms - Theory: pattern matching- Also: Systems, Architecture
* Compiler construction is fun and challenging

Key: Ablilty to extract properties of a source program (analysis) and transform it to construct a target program (synthesis)

== Summary ==

* A compiler is a program that converts some input text in source language to outoput in a target language.
* Compiler cnstruction poses some of the most challenging problems in computer science 
