= Mixed Strategies =

A mixed strategy is a strategy which involves a probabilistic approach with pure strategies.
We can play in both normal form (tableau) and in extensive form (tree), assigning a probability function for each choice that sum to one.

=== Celebrated theorems ===

John von Neumann (1928) : von Neumann showed that every zero-sum game with perfect informatin has solutins which minimise the maximum lsses for the players, but mixed strategies may be required von Neumann invented game theory as a mathematical discipline.

Nash (1950) : Every game with a finite number of players in which each player has a finite number of pure strategies has at last ne Nash equilbrium. Some will involve mixed strategies. 


== When mixed strategies are needed ==

Mixed strategies can be required when there is hidden information:
* Extensive form games with hidden information (e.g. poker)
* Normal frm games always have hidden information (the hidden strategy of the opponents)


= The simplest example =

* Two brothers Donald (older) and Eric ( younger) go to the same high school
* There are two cafes in the school: Red and Blue where they lunch every day.
* Donald wants to be in a different cafe then little brother
* but Eric always wants to be near big brother.


|      | Red     | Blue    |
|------|---------|---------|
| Red  | (-1,1)  | (1,-1)  |
| Blue | (1, -1) | (-1, 1) |

Each chooses the lunch spot probabilistically.

Donald chooses Red with probability $x$, therefore choosing Blue with probability $1 - x$.
Eric chooses Red with probability $y$, likewise the same as Donald's choice for blue: $1-y$ .


* Since the strategies are probabilistic, so are the payoffs.
* S we need the expected payoffs.
* Let $U_1 (S_1 , S_2 ) $ is the payoff to Player 1 for a given set of pure strategies, $( S_1 , S_2)$
* Expected payoff is $Ex \[ U_1 (S_1, S_2 ) \] $.

== Optimising Donald's decision ==


If Eric always goes to Red cafe:

{{$%align%

Exc \[ U_{1} (s_{1} (x) , Red ) \] & = (-1) x + (1) ( 1 - x) \\
& 1 - 2 x 

}}$

If Eric always goes to Blue cafe:

{{$%align%

Ex \[ U_{1} ( S_{1} (x), Blue ) \] & = (1) x - (-1) (1 - x) \\
& 2 x - 1
}}$

*Task*: find the value of $x$ such that:

{{$%align%

Ex \[ U_{1} ( S_{1} (x), Red) \] & = Ex \[ U_{1} ( S_{1} ( x ) , Blue ) \] 
}}$


== Why must the expected payffs be equal ? ==

If they are not equal then :
* Eric will have a pure strategy best response
* Then Donald's best respnse will be a pure strategy 
* But there is no pure stategy Nash equilibrium!

=== Interesting property of the solution === 

A common feature of mixed strategy Nash equilibria

1) If one player plays its component of the mixed Nash equilibrium, the payoff is indifferetn to what the other player does.
2) The other player must also play its component of the Nash equilibrium to force the first player to play its cmpoonent and not take advantage.


== Key ideas == 

* Introduce probabilities over pure strategies
* Set the expected payoffs against each opponents's pure strategy to be equal to find the value of the probabilites
* With 2-action, 2-player gamnes, Nash equilibria can be found graphically.
